# PCA (Prometheus Certified Associate) Exam Mock

## PCA
- https://training.linuxfoundation.org/certification/prometheus-certified-associate/

## Exam Info
- Duration: 90 min
- Question: 60
- Pass: x > 75% (min 45/60)

## Exam Topics

### Observability Concepts (18%)
1. What is the preferred approach used by Prometheus to collect metrics from a target?
2. How do Observability, Monitoring, and Telemetry differ in terms of their functionalities?
3. What is RED Method?
4. What are the distinctions between SLO, SLI, and SLA?
5. In the context of tracing, what is the meaning or representation of a span?
6. In which scenarios is distributed tracing less beneficial or NOT as applicable?
7. What are typically tracked within a span of a trace?
8. What are the 3 core components of observability?
9. Which type of data is monitored by Prometheus?
10. In the context of monitoring and observability, what type of data is typically used to define a SLI?
11. What is the meaning or purpose of an error budget policy?
12. What is one advantage of the push model for recoring metrics compared to pull models?
13. How do Prometheus, ELK stack, and InfluxDB differ in terms of their functionalities and use cases?
14. What is the definition of a metric?
15. What are the Prometheus exemplars?

### Prometheus Fundamentals (20%)
1. What is the CLI utility tool for Prometheus called?
2. What are the limitations of Prometheus?
3. What is Service Discovery and which categories are there?
4. Which property configures the timing to scrape metrics from targets?
5. Which section in the Prometheus configuration file governs the selection of targets to be scraped?
6. Which action in the label configuration is used to delete a specific target?
7. How is managed data retention in prometheus?
8. What are the essential 3 components of Prometheus?
9. What is required to be able to reload Prometheus?
10. What are 3 methods to restart the Prometheus server?
11. What HTTP method does Prometheus employ for performing scrapes?
12. Which SD configuration is recommended for scraping EC2 instances?
13. Which SD configuration is recommended for nodes of Elastic Kubernetes Service on AWS?
14. What is the purpose of the `scrape_interval` configuration in Prometheus?
15. Which type of database does Prometheus utilize?
16. What component is responsible for collecting metrics from an instance and exposing them in a format that Prometheus expects?
17. Which component is suitable for collecting metrics from batch jobs?
18. When is the configuration option `honor_labels:true` used?
19. What is the purpose of port `9090/9093/9100/9091` in Prometheus?
20. what are 2 default metric labels?
21. Which of the file systems is recommended/supported by Prometheus?
22. How can you configure a Blackbox Exporter probe to check the successful response of your servers to PING?
23. How do you configure the targets that Prometheus should scrape?
24. What is the agent deployment mode of Prometheus?
25. Which CLI command is suitable for unit testing Prometheus rules?
26. Which CLI command is suitable for checking validity of the config files?


### PromQL (28%)
1. What is PromQL?
2. What is histogram metric in Prometheus?
3. Which data types are used in PromQL?
4. What is the name of the vector in Prometheus that stores a single sample value?
5. Which PromQL function is used to estimate the value of a time series at a future time, t seconds from the current time, based on the range vector v?
6. Between what type of expressions can logical operators be defined?
7. Which function can be used to calculate the average of a range vector in Prometheus?
8. What is the diff between `avg(...)` and `avg_over_time(...)`?
9. With which type of metrics is the `rate(...)` function primarily used in Prometheus?
10. What does the term "offset" refer to in Prometheus?
11. What distinguishes the `rate(...)` and `irate(...)` query functions in Prometheus?
12. What distinguishes the `rate(...)` and `deriv(...)` query functions in Prometheus?
13. Which type of metric is suitable for measuring the internal temperature of a server?
14. What is the data type of Prometheus metric values?
15. How many unique series are generated by a histogram metric type?
16. What are the 4 components of the Prometheus metrics data model?
17. What is the difference between the ceil and floor functions?
18. Which query function among the following returns a result of 1 in case the specified time series does not exist?


### Instrumentation and Exporters (16%)
1. What is the HTTP headers to establish by Prometheus during each scrape?
2. Which 2 query parameters are required when configuring a Blackbox Exporter probe?
3. What is the exposition format of Prometheus?
4. Does Prometheus need to perform any format conversion on the metrics returned by a monitored Linux machine?
5. What is the default endpoint that Prometheus uses to scrape the metrics from the target?
6. Where is the version of the Prometheus exporter typically defined?
7. What is the most suitable exporter for monitoring an HTTP web server endpoint to verify that it returns a 200 status code?
8. Which Prometheus exporter is recommended for monitoring network devices?
9. Which networking protocol does Prometheus utilize for performing scrapes?
10. What is the purpose of a Prometheus metrics registry?
11. What is the purpose or definition of a Prometheus exporter?
12. In what scenarios would you use the Blackbox Exporter?
13. How does Prometheus identify the scrape path for its targets?
14. Which endpoints allows blackbox probing?
15. In a scenario where you have a dynamic etcd database containing scrape targets for Prometheus, how should you configure service discovery?
16. What are the 2 types of attributes that can be present in the `/metrics` endpoint?


### Recording & Alerting & Dashboarding (18%)
1. Is there a way to deactivate a specific route in Alertmanager for a specific time frame?
2. What is considered a best practice when it comes to alerting in monitoring systems: focusing on alerting based on symptoms or alerting based on causes?
3. What is the meaning of "alert symptoms" and "alert causes" in the context of monitoring systems?
4. Which aspect, symptoms or causes, is more visible to customers in the context of an issue?
5. What is the good naming convention for the recoring rules?
6. What is Acknowledge-based throttling and Time-based throttling?
7. What are the 3 possible statuses of a Prometheus alert?
8. How can I use a PromQL query to retrieve the currently active alerts in Alertmanager?
9. What is the recording rules in Prometheus?
10. How to define the recording rules?
11. Whas is the alert fatigue?
12. Which feature of Alertmanager is responsible for formatting and customizing the alerts?
13. How can you configure Alertmanager to disable the grouping of alerts for a specific route effectively?
14. Which software is commonly used for visualizing Prometheus metrics?
15. What does the term "inhibiting" refer to in the context of Alertmanager?
16. What is the format used for defining alerting rules?
17. What is the significance of the `for` attribute in a Prometheus alert rule?
18. How can you temporarily mute/snooze/suppress an alert during maintenance in Prometheus?
19. What is the name of Prometheus native dashboarding and visualization feature?
20. How can you coordinate the simultaneous sending of multiple alerts with similar label sets in Prometheus?
21. Which feature of Alertmanager is resonsilbe for sending alert to the right receiver?
22. What is the purpose of the `repeat_interval/conitnue/group_wait/group_inteval` attribute in an Alertmanager route configuration?
23. Which 2 attributes of an alerting rule can be used to include extra metadata?
24. What are required for a high-availability configuration of Alertmanager?
